I'm, as you said, George Capalbo,
and we're from Backbone Networks,
and we're based out in Boston,
and we make Internet radio
automation software.
And actually, before we get started,
I want to do a little informal poll.
How many people here,
just give me a quick show of hands,
are actually broadcasting
on the net right now?
That sounds great.
How many people came here because
they want to go and start doing that?
How many people missed their
flight and they're on standby
at San Francisco National?
No, I'm just kidding.
So, I'm going to do something
a little different.
I know this is the Worldwide
Developer Conference,
but I think whenever new
technology rolls around,
weird things happen,
and Internet radio has been
no different than that.
And I thought we should take a look at
things in sort of more of a total view.
Let's look at radio itself and
how that evolved over time.
And then also,
rather than just talk about the tech,
and we will talk about some tech,
I want to go into the
business side of it.
Because some of you may or may not have
heard there are royalties associated
now if you're streaming music.
And it was a very, you know,
in the press,
inflammatory issue a few years ago,
and things have kind of settled out.
And I think a lot of people, you know,
one story or another,
and I want to kind of try to
straighten that out a little bit so
that you'll feel more comfortable
about getting back into broadcasting.
Because things are
settled out to do that.
So, we're going to,
we will look at all the things
you need to do to go ahead and
put up an Internet radio station.
And that includes, like I mentioned,
the royalties and the
regulatory environment.
So,
we'll go back and look at some history.
We're going to go back about
100 years and talk about
radio in a very short time.
We'll go a trip through time in
about maybe three or four minutes,
not too long.
We'll talk about Internet radio and how
that fits in with other types of radio.
We'll, you know,
we'll look at the regulations I've said.
You know, basically, you know,
how are you going to pay for doing
this if you have to pay royalties?
How do you go about getting some
money in to cover your costs or
maybe even make a small profit?
And then we'll talk,
this is the plug part.
We'll talk about what we do,
which is automation
systems for Internet radio.
So, let's see.
How's my clicker doing?
Here.
I don't want to, hopefully I don't blend
in with this laser.
They showed me how to use this once, but,
you know, it's okay.
So, it's interesting.
The Internet radio is very similar.
You can look at it very similar
to the way you do regular radio.
If you're driving in your
car and you switch it on,
you come in and you're in the middle of a
broadcast and you maybe hear some music,
you hear some commercials, a DJ talks,
and there's a transmitter
somewhere up on a hill that,
you know,
that broadcasts that signal and you
receive it in your car or your home or,
you know,
your FM device connected to you.
to your iPod, right?
And basically,
Internet radio is very similar.
We have a computer sending
the streams out to computers,
and there are now going to be in the
future other devices that are not
just computers that you'll be able
to listen to it in a portable way.
And we think that that's
when Internet radio is
really going to explode.
And then it's going to become
less Internet and more just
another way of broadcasting,
just the way radio is.
So, well,
I would hope one of the reasons you're
here is you want to find out about
doing radio with OS X and QuickTime.
And as you know, I'm sure if you've
attended other sessions,
that OS X and QuickTime are
all standards-based,
and it's the same for Internet radio.
And we prefer using MPEG-4,
which is the same codec that gets used
actually for the iTunes Music Store,
because it sounds great,
it plays on a number of devices,
and it'll play on more in the future.
And finally, as we go on,
we're going to talk
about the Internet radio.
we go along in the technology framework,
we're going to look at
the radio automation.
And that is a way to simplify
the operation of your station.
Now if you're -- if you're a -- you
look at -- think of a traditional radio
station where you're spinning desks,
you have to have somebody
sitting there doing that.
So, you know,
a lot of radio has moved to automation,
and we've decided to build a product
that allows you to do that for the
Internet and very simply with just a
few computers or even one computer.
So let's move on.
So -- so let's talk a
little bit about radio.
So now we'll start going back in time.
And, you know,
you can look at -- there's a
definition of this that says
it's a way to -- to broadcast
information by electronic means.
Well, Internet radio would fit
into that definition.
And it's really an old technology.
It's been around for 100 years.
And, you know,
it's all based on through-the-air
-- radio frequency spectrum.
And basically, originally,
there were -- there was actual data sent,
Morse code, you know, dots and dashes.
Have you watched Titanic, right?
They were sending their -- their
messages with Morse code on radio,
and that was really just about maybe
10 years after radio existed that they
had that ability to do that on ships.
And then from the 1920s,
it really blossomed because they
had the ability to do voice.
And, you know,
things got pretty interesting.
So if you all look at this -- ooh,
this slide changed from
when I gave it to people.
That's exciting.
You see about 1901,
Italian gentleman named Marconi went off
and did a first transatlantic signal.
And then you see in the '20s,
he started commercial broadcasting.
And then radio at home, you know,
Amos and Andy and all those old shows,
the Green Hornet, you know,
people would -- during the Depression,
didn't go out much and
radios were inexpensive.
So that really became -- it was
what pretty much television is now,
but obviously television
hadn't existed yet.
If you go back -- you go
further ahead in time,
about the 1960s,
there were other forms of
media competing with it,
television.
So, you know, radio changed as well,
and you get the better quality of FM.
And then in the 1970s,
we had the first satellite networks.
And I'm not talking about like
XM or Sirius where you listen
-- you listen from a satellite.
I'm talking about using satellites to
distribute programs around the world,
to affiliate stations.
So imagine if you're listening to a
nationally broadcast baseball game,
that's most likely coming over a
satellite into a radio station.
That all originated back in the '70s.
And then in the 1980s,
there was actually low-speed data that
was sent along with radio signals.
And there were these proprietary devices.
You get stock quotes and weather.
And, you know,
that kind of pre-sages things you
can do with internet radio and things
you can do with paging networks,
et cetera.
That's where all that started.
And then the 1990s,
talk a little bit about
the business side.
They changed the laws about how many
stations a single owner could have.
So you suddenly had these
huge groups coming out,
like Clear Channel,
Infinity Broadcasting,
where there are hundreds and thousands of
stations that are owned by one company.
And that changed the flavor of radio.
Radio maybe before those days
was very individual to a city.
And now there's a little bit
more of a homogenization.
So it's kind of -- it's, you know,
some people like it.
Some people, you know,
don't understand that it's -- it
isn't different in every city.
But some people don't like it.
And then, of course,
talk about the later '90s, we start,
you know,
we start talking about convergence.
And when I -- I remember when I would
go to the National Association of
Broadcasters show,
in the mid '90s, they were all saying,
"You know, radio is going to get
run over by convergence.
Convergence is really about -- about
video." And funny how radio seems to
have done pretty well at surviving this
and found its way into other mediums.
And it translated very nicely to it.
So you want to broadcast.
So it's very expensive to
do traditional broadcasts.
Why?
Because it's based on nature
provides radio spectrum.
And there's a limited amount of that.
And there's regulations for, you know,
how stations can be organized in
a certain city so that otherwise
they interfere with each other.
And that's all done by the U.S.
government,
the Federal Communications Commission.
And they actually came up with
the rules for all this back in,
really, the '20s.
And they did treaties
with other countries.
So if you ever go to Canada,
you see a lot of radio
stations along the border.
They have to send their signal
way up into Canada so they
don't interfere with U.S.
stations and vice versa.
So there's a lot of things that
go on that you don't know about,
you know, with radio.
And you have to have a regulatory body.
And you have to apply for a
license to be able to broadcast.
There's not a cost to it,
but you have to prove that you're
doing things in the public good.
And there's a lot of
competition for them.
And once a station gets a license,
it's very hard for them to lose it
unless they've broken a law or whatever.
And that's, you know,
that's limited by spectrum.
So if you want to go buy
or build a station in,
let's say, a market like San Francisco,
you're talking maybe $50, 100 million,
which is, you know, not a small change.
But if you're talking
about a smaller market,
let's say, name a town out in, you know,
the middle of California,
you're talking maybe millions
for a small AM or FM station.
So now recently, in the last five years,
we have satellite radio.
We talked about the different
kind of satellite distribution.
This is actually,
I'm talking about Sirius and XM and
how you can listen to that in your car.
Well, unfortunately,
if you want to start one of those,
you need a satellite.
Now there may be some channels available,
but there's a limited
number of channels on those,
a few hundred at most.
And basically,
that's pretty much taken at the moment,
so that's hard to do.
So there's pirate radio,
and I don't know, you know,
if you've heard about people
putting ships out at sea off the
coast of California and New York,
and they broadcast, you know,
out on international waters,
and you can hear the station, and, well,
you know, it's sort of dangerous, and,
well, it's all sort of illegal as well.
We actually, a few years ago at the
broadcaster show in Las Vegas,
there was a group of pirate broadcasters,
and they met in a church,
so they were granted asylum,
so they couldn't be arrested by the FCC.
So, that's, you know, not too much fun.
That might be an exciting
life for some people,
but, you know, if you're a pirate,
you're going to have to do a lot of work.
If you want to start something
and have a business and
something you can enjoy doing,
you don't want to be on
the run from the police,
right, or the FCC for that matter.
So, to address that,
the FCC decided to put out
a regulation that said,
well, you can do low-power
FM stations in cities,
because that won't interfere
with other big stations.
Well, of course, the large broadcasters
have blocked all that,
because they say, no,
it's going to interfere with us,
and plus, it's also competition.
So,
that's what you would expect them to do.
So, that's, you know,
there's only a few hundred of
them that have been on the air,
and there's about, let's see, what is it?
Say, there are 30,000 inquiries
about doing this.
So, obviously,
there's a demand for radio.
So, finally, we come to internet radio.
So,
instead of using electromagnetic waves,
we're using the internet.
So, that's another electronic means,
as we talked about earlier, to transmit.
And, well,
it's a lower startup cost to do this.
So, really, you could just get some
computers and some bandwidth.
If you're at a college,
you might already have bandwidth.
You can rent machines, you know,
through ISPs.
There are services that will give
you a... a stream where you can have
some number of people listening.
And, you know,
it's very easy to go out and
reach a worldwide audience.
You can pretty much, you know,
hear things all over the
world without having to,
you know, with radio,
you'd have to wait for the ionosphere
to bounce the signal to you,
right?
Or, you know,
or get something on a satellite.
Well, with this, you can pretty much just
do this from any computer,
and it doesn't cost you,
the person running the station,
anymore to reach that person
on the other side of the world,
in Australia, we'll say,
then it would be to just be local.
So, it's a pretty wide reach.
So, the other thing now, well,
radio frequency, we talked about,
is a limited spectrum.
Well, there really isn't a
limit to the spectrum.
It's really just if there's
enough IP addresses.
How many IP addresses are there?
There could be that many stations.
So, it's really a lot more
things that could be done.
And, we talked about it's the
same cost to reach people.
And, one of the cool things about
internet radio is you can enhance it.
You can have text
annotation along with that.
You can have images.
You can have it as part of a webpage.
And, you can do things that
people can have feedback.
So, it's... It's... You know,
it's a pretty powerful medium.
And, a lot of people that we work with,
they're trying to reach a very narrowly
focused audience of just one type of,
you know, of music.
And, you get a lot more in-depth
and interesting things that
way than you do with just,
you know,
kind of the commercial radio station that
has to appeal to everybody in the town.
So, they do...they choose
a very broad spectrum.
So, and you can also... One of the things
you can get from internet radio that
you can't get from... How many of
you have ever gotten a ratings book
where they ask you to fill this out
and say what stations you listen to?
Right?
Okay.
So, that's... What they do is
they do statistical sampling.
So, they get, you know,
100 people in an area.
And then,
they base that...the population on that.
And, they say, "Well,
this is how many people are listening
to station X." With internet radio,
you can track very precisely
exactly how many people are
listening to your station.
And, you know, if you want to know where
they're coming from.
So, right now there are
about 12,000 stations,
traditional radio stations in the US.
and it took them about 80
years to get to that point.
Excuse me.
And Internet radio, well,
less than 10 years.
The first stations came
on the air about 1994.
We're about 10 years out from that.
And there's about 30,000 worldwide
and the number is growing.
It's a little hard to
find the total number,
but that seems to be a pretty
good approximation if you add
together all the different
services and people broadcasting.
So that's pretty phenomenal growth.
So, you know, for now,
let's go back a little bit and
think about traditional radio.
It took it a very long time
for that technology to get,
you know, embedded and mature.
And Internet radio,
the curve has just been a huge spike.
So this is kind of explosive growth.
Well, not only are the number
of stations are growing,
but the number of listeners are
growing by about 25% per year.
So how many of you have ever
tried to listen to the FM inside
an office cubicle and all you get
is you get the noise from the,
you know, the fluorescent lights or
you can't even get a signal?
So a lot of people listen at work.
That's one of the biggest
audiences for Internet radio.
And you get other things, you know,
people promoting their
product or services,
looking for a particular service.
A lot of stations are things
that are promoting something,
right?
And, you know, last night I was--how
many--anybody from Boston here?
I was listening to the
Red Sox game last night,
sorry, over the Internet radio,
which was terrific to do,
but the outcome wasn't too good.
But we'll get them later, I'm sure.
So that's pretty cool.
So now let's go into some of
the business side of this.
Let's talk about some costs.
Well, so you have setup costs.
You've got to get
yourself some computers,
and I actually have a
typical kind of setup here.
Oh, this is really only kind of prop.
This really isn't all connected up,
so we actually could broadcast,
but we probably won't, but it looks nice.
So I have a nice studio mic here.
I have a friend that makes
these down in Pasadena.
They're actual ribbon mics,
so you talk through this,
you sound like Edward R.
Murrow, if you know who that is.
It sounds great.
And I've got a little mixing board,
and I can connect that into a Mac.
I actually have a nice
Pro Audio card here.
There are a number of
manufacturers for this,
but this will do actual,
if you know what balanced audio is,
and if anybody's an audio person here,
you can do really good sounding stuff,
you know, to hum.
And all that.
It'll actually take digital inputs,
so there's a lot of power that, you know,
OS X actually enables this.
It's very easy to go and add devices in.
So that would be pretty much
all you would need to be
broadcasting from anywhere,
and, you know, we can look at,
we'll look a little bit at that later on.
We'll go do a demo at the
end of the presentation here.
So, running costs.
Well,
if you're a traditional radio station,
you need power to power your transmitter,
and you could have some, you know,
large power bill, electricity bill.
You could have some, you know,
large power bill,
electricity bill every month.
You could have some, you know,
large power bill every month.
Well, with internet radio, the cost is,
or there are some costs of bandwidth,
and that's basically for each person
that's listening to your stream,
you have to send those bits, however,
you know,
however many you need to have that person
be able to hear the audio to each person.
There are a couple of ways to do this
that we'll talk about a little bit later,
but mainly, you know,
you have to pay for that bandwidth,
and that's one of your running costs,
and the more people listen, it scales up.
There are,
depending on what kind of deals
you can get for bandwidth,
there are some economies
of scale to some extent.
Like, you may... You may be able to get,
you know,
a bucket to start out with that gives
you pretty much your normal listenership,
and then if you go over that,
you pay more,
so you can predict what the costs are.
Well, so the other part is royalties,
and this is kind of the contentious part
that's evolved over the last few years,
and there are two types of royalties.
So, they're actually the new royalties
that apply to internet radio,
which do not apply to broadcast,
are performance royalties,
and that's all done through the RIA,
and there's a group called SoundExchange.
We're going to be
talking a lot about this,
just so you know.
And there's also composition royalties,
which traditional radio pays,
and that's pretty much, you know,
a percentage of your revenue,
and it's a fairly low number,
and that goes to the composer
and to the lyricist for the song,
and that's been done, you know,
for years.
And so,
they're also... There are reporting
requirements for both traditional
radio and for internet radio,
and the internet radio ones
are a little more detailed,
and... But computers help
you solve some of that.
So let's talk about our setup costs.
So your computer.
Now we talked about the
client server model,
the transmitter on the high hill.
So kind of the equivalent
of Mount Sutro out here in
San Francisco is an ISP that's
connected to the Internet backbone.
So you can locate your server there
and then do your remote broadcast
from wherever you need to be.
That would be your studio.
So that server takes
connections from your listeners,
we talked about,
and sends some bandwidth to them.
And you can also track
that when they come in.
You'll know who they are.
And you have some kind of
encoding client or control client.
We'll talk a little bit later on about
the different models that are typically
used for doing Internet broadcast.
And that can send a stream to a server,
that control client,
or it can just control what's
going on in the server.
So bandwidth-- so basically,
the way bandwidth works out
is the more bandwidth you use,
the better quality your sound is.
And that's probably pretty obvious.
But with new codecs,
you can actually keep
lowering that amount down,
so you can actually get
more listeners from the same
amount of internet bandwidth.
And the AAC codec-- we're going
to listen to some samples of that
later on-- is pretty terrific.
And there's better stuff coming along.
It's really kind of a moving thing.
The technology is getting better
and the sound is getting better.
And the ability of people to
listen at their homes-- a lot
of people have broadband now--
that's gotten better as well.
I talked a little bit earlier
about saying there are a
couple different kinds.
A unicast connection to a server
is you're sending the same
bits to each person directly.
Multicast is a pretty cool concept,
but unfortunately,
it doesn't really get used in practice.
And that is you let the Internet routers
decide who needs the stream.
So only one copy goes into your network.
So if there's 1,000 people
inside your network listening
to this network segment,
listening to your station,
there's only one copy of that going in.
So that minimizes cost.
The problem is most of the Internet is
not really set up for that.
What happens is multicast
gets thrown out by routers.
So multicast is very close to what
it's like to do traditional radio where
you're just sending one signal out and
everybody listens to the same thing.
OK, so now we'll get into
the interesting part,
the royalties.
So I talked about composition royalties.
And those are, there's a group, BMI,
ASCAP, and CSAC.
There's also something
called the Harry Fox Agency.
And basically you're paying, as I said,
you're paying for the composition
and you're paying for the lyricist.
And that gets split up
by this organization.
And it's based on a
percentage of revenue.
And I think I have an URL down here.
If not,
it's on the end of the presentation that
you can go there and there's a calculator
and you can punch in the numbers.
Based on how much revenue you
have and they give you a number.
And it's a fairly reasonable thing.
And all Internet broadcasters have
paid that back to when they started,
pretty much.
So the interesting royalties
are the performance royalties.
So when the DMCA came
out back in the late 90s,
there's a provision in the law
that said you cannot stop someone
from broadcasting on the Internet.
There's a compulsory license.
You can guarantee you're not breaking
the law by broadcasting on the Internet.
However, you have to pay a royalty.
And this ended up turning
into a performance royalty,
which they've modified now to say you
can be charged either for how many people
are listening to a particular song.
This is for streaming music.
And how many people are listening at a
particular time to when that song played.
Or you can just count the
amount of listening hours.
And they have a number.
They say, well,
you played 12 or 14 songs in that hour.
And we'll give you a value based on that.
And that's collected by a group.
But a new organization
called Sound Exchange,
and I have an URL for that.
You can check that out.
And there's all the real
details of that as well.
So once again,
traditional broadcasters are
paying the composition royalties.
And that's based on a few percent.
And there's a minimum of about $264.
And there's the URL.
Okay.
There we go.
That's the URL at askcap.com.
You can find all that.
Okay.
So, as I've mentioned,
the performance royalties
are very contentious.
I mean, it was really,
you may have seen stories about this
is going to kill Internet radio,
it's going to shut down.
A lot of people pulled their streams
off the air and there was a lot of,
you know, fear and panic and it
really made a lot of news.
And that was because
this was a new thing.
And especially for the traditional
broadcasters who were putting
a stream on the Internet,
they're not used to paying
performance royalties.
They say, you know,
we provide a promotional value.
So it was deemed that radio, you know,
had a perceived promotional
value back in the 20s.
And so that's helping the record
industry to promote their music.
So because I think of,
because of the reasoning for it was
because of the fragmented nature
of a lot of Internet stations,
it's just a small audience.
It's not, you know,
the more general thing
that commercial radio does.
So they were able to,
they kind of negotiated it out so
they had to pay performance royalties.
Well, so the political turmoil lasted for
about two years and Congress got involved
and there was a settlement act for a
lot of people that were broadcasting.
At that time,
we're able to get in and get something
that allowed them to stay in business.
So, and as I said,
this all goes back to the DMCA.
And that was,
it was intended to address the rights
holder concerns in digital media.
And, you know,
you can imagine if you were in a
business and you owned something and
suddenly people were able to get it,
you know, for free,
you'd be nervous about it.
And if you're someone that
was already doing this,
you know, well,
then you'd want to keep doing it, right?
Why should I pay for something
I haven't paid for before?
Why do I want more costs?
So the players in all this are the RAA,
which I'm sure you've heard of.
It's a group that's made up of,
they represent all the
major recording labels.
The U.S.
Copyright Office,
they're the arbitrators.
And there's a Digital Media Association,
which is the best known
of the webcaster side.
But there's various other things.
And some technology companies
are involved as well.
So, the law said that, you know,
these groups could sit down and
negotiate something and come up
with their own settlement and decide
this is what we're going to pay.
Well, of course, they couldn't do that.
As I said, you know, the webcasters said,
we don't want to pay anything
because we're not paying it now.
And the recording industry said, well,
we'd like you to pay a lot.
So they couldn't agree.
So at that point, the Copyright Office,
by law, gets involved and arbitrates it.
So they have something called the
Copyright Arbitration Royalty Panel.
And these meet,
they set the rates for about two years.
So we're actually coming near
the end of a two-year period.
The rates will be possibly
different next year.
So the first set of rates were very
high and they were retroactive in 1998
and that's what caused all the uproar.
So, and there are of course different
rate levels for college,
non-commercial or commercial.
We're going to look at those a bit.
So first we'll talk about
college Internet radio.
And this is the current rates now.
So this is actually a
fairly reasonable thing.
It's actually,
only if you go above a certain
amount of performances or tuning
hours do you actually own more.
There's actually just a flat
rate of a few hundred dollars.
And you pay $50 to the data fund,
which I'm not really
100% sure what that is,
but I believe that has to do with how you
collect the information about the data.
So, and that's a little
bit different in 2004.
If you have,
if your college is based on college size,
if you have more than 10,000 students,
your rate's a little bit higher.
But this is pretty reasonable and,
you know, college could easily make sure
their Internet station could go,
could stay on the air.
Now they do limit the
number of stations you have.
If you go,
if you try to do a bunch of stations,
once again we said the
spectrum's unlimited.
Well, they kind of put a limit on you.
Then you have to start paying the,
you know, the per rates for hours.
So if I'm non-commercial,
you actually pay a flat rate of $400,
and if you do news, it's less.
And when you say, wait a minute,
I'm doing news and talk,
why should I pay a royalty for that?
Well,
you might be using some bumper music,
you know, and things like that at
the start of your show.
So they kind of just blanket
in that you're doing that.
And there's a flat rate
for all this as well.
And once again, if you go over a certain
amount of streaming,
well, you know, then you kind of get
yourself into a quandary,
and you have to pay a little bit more.
but you've got to get
fairly large to do that.
So now we'll talk about
the commercial entities.
And this is the compulsory license again.
And basically, one performance is one
listener listening to a song.
So if there are 1,000 people listening
to a song playing on your music station,
that's 1,000 performances.
And so the rate is,
we're set at about .07 cents,
which adds up over time.
And they say that, well,
4% of your performances bear no royalty.
That's to kind of deal with
people that only stay on for a
short amount of time and missed
connections and things like that.
So they give you a
little leeway for that.
The earlier rates actually had
something called an ephemeral fee,
where they charge you for
storing music on your computer,
some percentage of your royalty.
And that's not in this.
They simplified it for this next round.
So you can see it's kind of moving toward
something a little more... reasonable.
So there's a minimum fee for this.
So if you really don't stream much,
you still owe them $500.
And if you have multiple stations,
the minimum,
and they only have a few listeners,
the maximum you can do is $2,500.
So, okay, so I have some examples
here of the rates,
and this is for the
aggregate tuning hours.
And you can see that if you're
an Internet-only station,
you pay the most.
If you're doing news talk,
you pay the least.
And if you're just simulcasting
your radio station,
you pay a little less.
So that's for traditional broadcasters,
get a little price break and all that.
And so I have some examples
here of what things would be.
And I came up with,
let me get a little closer to this,
I guess my eyes are going bad.
I can't read my own slide here.
What,
this should show us what that'll be.
Okay.
Right.
To pay for this,
you'd want to run commercials.
Okay, so if you imagine someone
that's running so many,
you know, listeners per hour, and,
you know, they had a bill of, you know,
of $800 a month, they'd have to do about
$3.50 an hour in commercials.
So, you know, you could easily get some
kind of revenue in just to,
you know,
that's not a lot of money to have
to go out and raise or get an
underwriter to cover those rates.
And they do go up as
your audience goes up,
but that's more valuable to your,
you know, to your advertisers as well.
So, we can talk a little bit about the
Small Webcaster Settlement Act.
Now this was designed for people
that were already webcasting to help
them avoid a very onerous spill.
So they really put a flat
rate for the years that,
you know, they didn't know this was all,
what things were going to happen, 1998,
1999.
And basically you're eligible for
this if you fit in a range of things.
And if you're in that, and this actually,
I think this expires this year,
turn of the year,
and this basically allowed a
lot of people who were already
broadcasting to stay on the air.
And it was, you know, a compromise.
And, you know,
compromise is not a perfect thing,
but it allowed people to stay on the air.
So it was probably, you know,
it was a good thing that it all happened.
So, part of the compulsory
license is you must report.
So there's reporting, which requires,
which you're required to decide,
you know, what you have to pay,
and that's based on what you play
and how many people are listening
or how many tuning hours you have.
And there's also something
called the broadcast complement,
and that's the mix of music you can play.
This is, they provide rules that say,
you know, how many songs you can play by
an artist in a two-hour period,
et cetera, and repeat them, you know,
within a day.
And you're supposed
to follow these rules.
They give you a little leeway,
but you're supposed to
roughly follow these rules.
It's, you know,
a little bit of a restriction,
but it's something that, you know,
traditional broadcasters
have always done.
And then there's finally annotation.
So you have to display the name and
artist of the title artist of the
people that have made the music,
its music, as part of the...
So let's look at the
reporting requirements.
So every three months you
have to do two weeks of log,
and basically you have the name
of your service and what type
of transmission categories,
whether you're a news station
or a music or a non-commercial,
etc.
Then you talk about each song and say
how many performances of that song.
So you have to give
them a two-week period,
and you can just select
that from whatever you want,
and that's how they kind of,
they do a statistical thing,
and they say, okay, yeah, okay,
he's pretty much playing what
he says he's going to do,
and they base your rates on that.
So, here's the detail on
the sound performance,
sound recording performance complement.
And this is a thing,
a follower I said from
a traditional radio.
And it's designed to keep
listeners from recording music.
So the idea is it kind
of randomizes everything.
You don't know what's coming up.
So you can't say what's
going to play next.
And you can say what's played,
but you can't say what's
going to play next.
And you can't play the same things
at the same time every hour so people
will know if I tune in now I can
get that U2 song that's popular.
So this is basically, like I said,
there's some leeway to this.
You can do about 10% out of it.
So if there's some special thing and
you play a lot of songs by one artist in
the music realm for a special someone,
let's say if an artist passes away,
you can do that and not violate it.
So, here's an example of an annotation.
This is actually from a
station that we stream.
This is a Beggar's Banquet record
recording company Internet radio
station called AV Deck.
This is a track that they
had a few years back.
And you can see it's got copyright
and it's got artist and title.
And, you know,
as a bonus for Internet radio,
which is pretty nice,
you can embed a link in that.
So, if it's commercial,
you can have it point to the
website of the company that's
buying the commercial time from you.
If you're promoting music,
you can have it go and point to,
you know, the recording label or
maybe a music store,
you know, or a number of things.
So the royalty summary.
You only owe royalties if you play
music that you don't own a license to.
The compulsory license that
we talked about is not just
absolutely for everybody.
If you can work out a deal with
someone or some particular record
company or let's say you're a
band and you own your own music,
you don't owe any royalties.
You can go and broadcast what you want.
So there are a lot of things,
but this allows people to kind of
play music that they like of different
genres and do it in a legal way.
So you may have to
prove that you do this.
They may come after you.
They may come after you and ask you,
you know, wait a minute,
you're broadcasting,
show us you can do that.
So you may have to show a contractor
a log that shows what you've played,
etc.
But you can do that.
So, well,
here's where computers start to come in.
Now, we talked about all this
reporting and the royalty rates,
and there's a lot of math there.
And if you had to sit
down and do that by hand,
looking at your logs,
you'd just be doing that
day after day after day.
It would take up all your time,
or you might have to
hire someone to do that,
and that would be a terrible job to have,
really.
You know,
so computers make that a lot easier.
And that's one of the things that we do,
is we track Backbone Radio, my product.
We track who's listened in your log,
and then we put it all
in a relational database,
and we allow you to go in and just say,
you know, hey, what did I play?
And we give you actually some example
queries of what that looks like,
and you can actually just calculate
that stuff with a few clicks of a mouse.
So that saves you having to
have a person in to do that.
So, and of course,
you can write special software
now that you've got this data.
And there might be some
interesting things you could do.
You could show the people that are
buying commercial time from you,
well, look,
here's who was listening at this time.
So you really, you know,
you really got a good, you know,
a good response based on this,
because a thousand people were listening,
you know, at that point.
Or if you're promoting music,
you can look at those
demographics and say,
well, what was more popular?
What did people like to listen to?
When did they turn off their stream,
you know, in the middle of a song?
Maybe that tells me something.
So, and you can look at what
times things are more popular,
so you can decide, you know,
what's the most popular.
What's the best,
what's the prime time to charge,
you can maybe charge
more for commercials.
So you can pretty much
do your own ratings.
Okay, so that was all the legal parts and
the parts that you're required to do
to be able to do the station legally.
So let's talk a little bit about the
technology of what's behind all this.
So we talked about encoding briefly,
and really you get a trade-off.
If you send more data to your listeners,
you get better quality,
but it costs you more.
We talked about the client-server model,
and we're talking about QuickTime here,
right, because you're at WWDC.
So we use something called
the Realtime Protocol,
which is an Internet standard
for streaming,
and each QuickTime file contains in
it something called a hint track,
which tells a server how to go about
building the Realtime Protocol packets
that need to be sent to a listener.
And we standardize an
MPEG-4 AAC just because,
you know, it's pretty cool,
and it sounds great.
And also, we're going to look at
some broadcasting models.
We're doing this, so we'll say,
what is encoding?
Well,
your source material could be anything.
It could be a CD,
it could be an MP3 that's high quality,
and you basically perform math on
this with some software that says,
if I take out,
how much data can I take out
and it still sounds good?
So you can do that and
minimize the amount of data
you have to send to somebody,
yet keep the quality.
And as I said,
it's a very subjective thing,
and it's really a trade-off
of how much you want to use,
of bandwidth you want to use
and how much you want to pay
as to how good the quality is.
And, you know,
it's a very personal thing.
So obviously, higher data rates,
higher quality and higher cost,
lower data rate, you know, basically,
it can sound okay,
but it's reduced quality.
For example, like the baseball game I was
listening to last night was sent
at about 10 kilobits a second,
and it's just voice,
so it really sounded like kind
of a bad telephone connection,
but I can understand all of it.
But if you're doing Tchaikovsky, well,
you might want something that's
stereo and a much better quality.
So you might want to be able to have
different encodings for different types.
So there's some other
trade-offs you can do.
Stereo is great,
but you can get as good a quality at
less data rate by just choosing mono.
So we'll talk a little
bit about MPEG-4 AAC.
And this is done by Dolby Labs,
and this is included in QuickTime.
And it's currently kind of the
state of the art for streaming.
And this is really,
it's based on standards.
So if you and I wanted to go
out and build our own codec,
we could go get a copy of the
standard and sit down and write some
code and come up with something that
put out the same format as MPEG-4,
and it sounds better.
And we could have an MPEG-4 codec,
and that's exactly what's happening.
So there are codecs that are on the
way that I'm sure that QuickTime will
adopt as time goes by that sound
even better at lower data rates.
But once you're in the standard,
it's guaranteed to be backward
compatible and forward,
which is one of the great
things about standards.
And also,
standards mean that as new devices
come up that support the standard,
they're going to be able to
play your audio natively.
You don't have to do anything
special to make all that happen.
And there are actually
no royalties as well.
So I have some music samples.
Let's see if we can hear this.
"That's 128 kilobit a second stereo
MPEG-4 and that's kind of what
comes out of the iTunes Music Store.
And it sounds pretty good.
Okay,
so we'll go to music sample number two.
I didn't start.
Well, the demo gods are not
completely with me so far.
But I do have a 48-kilometer here.
Let's try to see if
number three goes here.
http://www.gmail.com/news/radio-radio-rad
io-radio-radio-
So let's talk a little bit more in
depth about the client server model.
So as I said, listeners on the
Internet are your clients.
It's very similar to traditional radio
where you've got the transmitter in the
high hill and people listening in their
car in their home to a radio station.
Well,
if you're listening on your computer,
it's a very similar thing.
So the difference with Internet radio,
of course, is we mentioned that there
can be two-way communication.
So I can get some
information back from you.
You can send me an email.
We can do a chat, etc.
And there's a lot of things that are,
you know, that's a very interesting thing
that traditional radio can't do.
So in most cases, as we said,
we talked about multicasts and unicasts.
There's a stream sent to every listener.
So that's different
from traditional radio,
but it's there.
So let's talk a little bit about that.
The real-time protocol is the
way that the data that's in the
stream is broken up into small
pieces and sent to the player.
And it's designed so if you're
ever driving in your car and you're
listening to FM and you go under a
bridge and FM drops out for a second,
a real-time protocol is designed to
make that possible with computers.
If there's some disruption in
the stream for some reason,
it won't just fall over.
It knows that it can throw some
data away and so it can be lossy.
So it's designed to kind of
exist in harsh environments.
and you can still get
a pretty good stream.
And of course all the packets
have numbers and so they're
all sent from the server.
They may arrive in any order at
the player and the player decides
how to put them back together
based on their sequence number and
when to play them based on there's
a time stamp in each packet.
So, there's also something called the
Real Time Control Protocol which
basically it tells the player,
this is more important
if you're doing video,
but it tells the player basically,
you know, this video frame is at the same
time as this audio so that you
can sync lip sync and all that.
But there are actually also reports sent
back from the player to your server which
talk about the quality of the service.
So your server can
automatically adjust itself.
So this guy's having a loss,
I'll send him some repeat packets
and there's kind of a you know,
there's only a certain point of
loss that you can go to before,
you know, things fall over.
But if there's just a little
bit under say 10 or 20 percent,
you can actually compensate a bit and,
you know,
and get a still keep a good quality
stream by sending a little extra data.
This is the control protocol.
So when you're in your
QuickTime player and you hit play
and pause buttons or open a stream,
you're sending RTSP commands to
a server which say just that.
I'd like to listen to the stream,
set it up.
You know, I want to play or pause.
If it's a file you listen to the stream,
you can actually move around randomly.
You can't do that in a live
stream because obviously,
you know, it's live, right?
So you're hearing what's in the now.
It'll also tear down the connections
so the server knows if you've
disconnected from the server that it
shouldn't be sending you those packets.
It can use that bandwidth
for somebody else,
and that's all done under the covers.
So you can take a player,
and you can encapsulate that, you know,
inside.
You can have a stub movie that
actually just has information
about what the stream is,
and you can put that inside a web
page or you can mail that to somebody,
you know,
or you can have your web page launch
an external player so they can be
scrolling through different pages as
they're listening to their radio stream
so there's a lot of detail to that.
I won't go into a lot of
that just because that's some
things that are going on in,
you know, other sessions.
I'm sure they've covered
that in a lot of detail.
So let me talk a little bit
about broadcasting models.
So how is Internet radio done?
So let's kind of look at,
this is more of a
traditional broadcaster,
and, you know, they've got a studio.
So they've maybe got a radio automation
system that just puts out audio,
right?
So they've got a hard drive somewhere,
or they've got some CDs,
or there's some places
they still do tapes,
right?
And they put that through a mixer,
and there's a microphone, et cetera.
And at some point, that comes out,
and it'll go maybe to a, you know,
obviously it goes to a
transmitter up on the high hill,
the real, you know, RF-based broadcast,
but it goes into a compressor,
and that compressor sends either
over public Internet or sometimes
they just use an ISDN line so
they have guaranteed bandwidth,
and they send that off to an encoder
or they send the encoded data,
you know, from the station.
It's really a choice of the
people putting it together,
and then that goes to a server.
So.
The good part about this
is it's pretty simple.
Well,
the bad part of it is you don't actually,
other than, you might be able to,
you can track the number
of hours people listen to,
but you don't really know,
you have to go correlate your logs to
that if you want to do performances.
You really don't have that correlation
of who listened to what was played.
Okay, so another typical thing
is an MP3 hosting service.
So you upload some files manually
and you build a fixed playlist,
and that fixed playlist runs,
and it can be very long, you know,
and it can do some things randomly,
but it pretty much just repeats,
and you have to go and manually go
change that to get that to be different.
And once again,
you could get some information on that,
on who's listening and all that,
but that has to be built
into that software.
Typically those are very simple.
They're just really just
sending out a stream.
They're not doing all the logging.
So we can talk about
Internet radio automation,
which is what I do.
And in this case,
there's a control client that
actually controls the server remotely
from anywhere you are in the world.
So really,
your server just does what it's told,
and the server has a lot of intelligence.
So it can do,
we talked about the broadcast complement,
there's a set of rules you have to do,
or maybe you want certain broadcasts
to go on at certain times.
The automation system can make
your station sound very fresh.
And at the same time,
if you want to broadcast live,
you can now cut in.
And just send that live
stream to that ISP,
so avoiding having to
have a stream that's,
if there's some disruption in that,
if you're not broadcasting live,
your station's going to stay on the air.
And of course, that server is up on the
high hill at the ISP,
and you've got your
listeners listening to that.
And that server can now
keep track of all the logs,
it can keep track of who's
connecting and who's listening,
and allows you to go off
and build your reports.
So.
Bye.
Basically, with an automation system,
you can encode the clips ahead of time
and put them actually physically on
the server so they don't have to be
streaming from the client all the time.
They can just sit on the server
and run when they need to,
and you can let that run autonomously.
So you could have people on the air that
are just looking at what's playing now,
and they know what they can talk about,
or you can have them pre-recorded.
There's a number of concepts in radio
that are built in automation systems.
At the same time,
your program director could
be choosing what's played.
You can have people doing
commercials that track that,
and that's called traffic
in traditional radio.
They could be doing that offline and
programming the station ahead of time,
and it all works very seamlessly.
At the same time,
that could be done from anywhere,
so those people don't really even have
to be in the same physical building.
They could be at a live remote somewhere,
they could be in their home,
in their office.
You can pretty much do a station and have
a lot of different people involved in it,
and not need a lot of bricks
and mortar to go and do that.
So I talked a lot about
doing dynamic playlists.
Basically, if you use rotation rules,
you can come up with something
that sounds very fresh,
and you're not doing anything
to do that because you know
it's going to be randomized.
You'll be following the law of
what you have to play to broadcast,
and you can have that set up
with a month's worth of music,
and it'll play without you
having to go to see the station.
So a lot of stations do
something called voice tracking,
where they actually
record the live inserts.
If you say, hey,
it's a great sunny day and it's raining,
well,
that doesn't quite work out the next day.
But you can do that in the future,
and a lot of radio stations do that.
It allows them to create
something that sounds pretty live,
but without having people sitting there.
The air talent can come in and
do their show in 20 minutes,
half an hour,
instead of being there all along.
But you can also do live assist.
You can actually have
somebody doing a show,
and they can... be
talking over their music,
or if they're doing a live broadcast,
you can have, you know,
material running and recorded...
You know, that's appropriate,
and then they can cut in and do
the live show if they're doing
a sporting event or whatever,
or use the playlist to have commercials
while you're doing your sporting event.
And, of course, an automation system does
all the logging as well.
So where is everything
heading at this point?
Well, the royalty situation
has really stabilized.
You know, one of the problems in
the period of the early,
you know,
2000s was that people didn't know
what the rules were going to be.
So that's a tough thing if you're
trying to run something where
you're going to have to pay and
you don't know how much that is.
Well, now it's very well known,
and now it's going to
evolve every two years.
So all of you can get
involved in this process and,
you know, lobby, you know,
Congress and do things
to try to get things to,
you know, come down even further perhaps
or make it easier to report.
So it's not going to be a fixed thing.
It's going to be
revisited every two years.
And, of course, well,
there are lots of mobile
devices on the way.
In a few years, you'll be able to,
your radio station will be
able to stream to phones,
you know, 3G and other things
that are coming along.
There's other standards
for high-speed data.
But the thing is radio
doesn't need that much speed.
You don't need the one and
a half megabits a second.
If you have a phone that can do that
and you're just doing a 56K stream,
it's going to sound great.
And, of course, this year the theme of
NAB 2004 was IP broadcasting.
So this convergence thing
has really happened now,
and everything is moving into being IP.
And I think over time you may see,
you know,
traditional terrestrial broadcasters
become a little less important,
especially with these portable
devices because you can imagine the
next thing might be in your car.
And that's where a lot of
traditional radio is going to be.
traditional radio is listened to now.
And given the unlimited
spectrum of the Internet,
you know,
that gives you as a station operator
a large audience to go choose from.
So it should be a pretty cool future.
Well, so I have a final thought before we
go off and do a little demo here.
Well,
there have been millions of downloads.
I think they just said 250 million
downloads of iTunes since it came out.
Right?
That's about the number.
I mean...
I'm sorry, of QuickTime, excuse me,
of QuickTime, thank you.
And well,
and also when you download iTunes,
you do get QuickTime for free.
It comes along.
So everybody that's downloaded iTunes
for Windows has got a copy of QuickTime.
So that means you've got people
that can listen to a stream
done from an OS X server and,
you know,
there's a lot of market out there that's
really been untapped and you can do it
much easier and much better quality,
you know, in our world.
Okay, well,
so I'm going to do a little demo here.
We can switch to the demo.
Actually,
Whoa, look at that.
There we go.
Okay, so I have an automation
system here that's running.
So we're actually looking at a
server that's running in Florida.
And I've got a time of what's
playing on the air now,
and I've got a countdown time.
I've got the time and date.
There are various things I can
do to change the microphone gain,
what my source is, etc.
I can look at a database.
Well, so I actually want to
do a little live insert,
and I need a volunteer from the audience.
Let's see if I can do
some stage diving here.
And I'll pick someone to do that.
How about you, sir?
Would you like to be a DJ?
Okay.
[Transcript missing]
Okay, so I'm going to start.
This is a little playlist.
This has got a little jingle.
And actually, we bring up the audio
just a little bit on this.
So we're actually going to go to...
So in 23 seconds this
playlist will start.
There's going to be about
a seven second intro.
Then you're going to see a script come
up and you just read what you see.
Just read what you see.
And you can translate into
Dutch on the fly if you'd like.
That won't work.
I can try.
Okay.
And so this would be
kind of a live assist.
You're standing on the rock, Z Rock,
WZHB.
Okay, so.
Hi San Francisco, you're here.
This is WWDC 2004.
And you've just heard Internet Radio in
Depth from George Capalbo.
Is that your name right?
Close enough.
Up next before we go to back
and ten great hits in a row,
it's your turn.
Step up and ask some questions.
Hey, thank you.
So now there were a lot of things
that were going on in that.
Let's talk a little briefly about
this in this automation system.
So the streaming is based on delay.
And there's about a five second
or so delay when things happen.
Our automation system actually
synchronizes his live voice
to what's playing on the air.
So to him,
he just has to look at a live cue and he
doesn't have to think about any of that.
And that, you know,
we were streaming to a
server that's out in Florida.
And that's now off
playing the next thing.